CONSTANTINOPLE

I

AT SEA

"Who has drunk will drink," assures the proverb; we could slightly modify the
formula, and say with no less accuracy: "Who has traveled
will travel.”--The thirst to see, like the other thirst, is irritated instead of
to die out in satisfaction. Here I am in Constantinople, and already I
think of Cairo and Egypt. Spain, Italy, Africa,
England, Belgium, Holland, part of Germany, the
Switzerland, the Greek islands, some scales of the coast of Asia, visited
at several times and on various occasions, have only increased this
desire for cosmopolitan wandering. Travel may be an element
dangerous to introduce into life, for it deeply disturbs and causes
worries similar to those of captive passing birds
at the time of the migrations, if any circumstance or any duty
prevents you from leaving. We know that we are going to expose ourselves to fatigue,
privations, to troubles, even to perils, it costs a lot to renounce
cherished habits of mind and heart, to leave his family, his
friends, his relations, for the unknown, and yet one feels that he is
impossible to stay, and those who love you do not try to
hold back and silently shake your hand on the running board of the
car. Indeed, shouldn't we travel the planet a bit on
which we gravitate through the immensity, until the
mysterious author transports us to a new world to make us
read another page of his infinite work? Isn't that a culprit
laziness always spelling the same word without ever turning the page?
What poet would be satisfied to see the reader confine himself to a single
his stanzas? So every year, unless you're rooted to the spot by the
most imperious necessities, I read a country of this vast universe which
seems smaller to me as I go through it and it emerges from the
vague cosmographies of the imagination. Without going specifically to
Holy Sepulcher, in Santiago de Compostela, in Mecca, I make a
pious pilgrimage to places on earth where the beauty of the sites makes
God more visible; this time I will see Turkey, Greece and a little
this Hellenic Asia where the beauty of the forms unites with the splendors
oriental. But let's end this short preface there (the shorter ones
are the best), and let's get started without further ado.


If I were a Chinese or an Indian arriving from Nanking or Calcutta,
I will describe to you with care and prolixity the way from Paris to Marseilles,
the Châlons railway, and the Saône, and the Rhône, and Avignon, but you
know them as well as I do, and moreover, to travel in a
country, one must be a foreigner: the comparison of differences produces the
Remarks. Who among us would notice that in France men give their arm
to women, a peculiarity which astonishes an inhabitant of the Celestial Empire?
Suppose then, without transition, that I am in port, and that the
_Leonidas_ warming up on his way to Constantinople. The South declares itself
already by a cheerful sun which warms the flagstones and makes chirps
hundreds of exotic birds in the cages on display at the front of
two bird-sellers: the happy macaws debit their repertoire, the
bengalis flap their wings, believing themselves at home; marmosets frolic
lightly, scratch their armpit, look at you with their eyes almost
human beings, and extend their cool little hands to you in a friendly way
through the bars, still heedless of consumption which will make them
coughing under cotton wool in the cold Parisian salons; he is not
down to the dreary tortoises that don't struggle in their shells and don't
revive to this life-giving ray; in forty hours I spent
torrential rain in the purest blue. I left the winter behind
me, and I find the summer ardent and splendid; I'm going to have an ice cream
an idea that would have made me shiver the day before yesterday on the Boulevard de Gand;
I go to the Turkish cafe: I owe that to myself, since I am leaving for
Constantinople; it is a very fine cafe, my faith. However I do not
wouldn't speak, despite its luxury of mirrors, gilding, small columns and
arcades, without a charming room in the entre-sol, decorated with paintings
of exclusively Marseilles artists: it is a very curious local museum
and very interesting. The woodwork is divided into panels
representing various subjects left to the imagination of the
painter.--Loubon, whose powdery landscapes of
sun and the great herds walking on stony grounds
pumice, made there his masterpiece, and a masterpiece,--a _Descent of
Buffaloes_ by a ravine on the approaches to an African town. The light
burns the white earth on which the blue shadow of beasts is projected
misshapen figures that follow the slope in foreshortening poses,
swaying, bumping their knock-knees, raising their drooling muzzles and
lustrous to smell the scorching air; latecomers are pressed by
the sting of a savage shepherd, tanned and dusky. In the background, the walls of
city ​​chalk, silhouetted against an indigo sky background, close up
the horizon clearly. It is free, firm and frank. Decamps would not
better. Mr. Brest, who had exhibited, two years ago, at the Salon, a beautiful
interior of forest, painted two landscapes of a charming color and
of a delicious fantasy: a pond in the middle of a wood of trees
exotics reflected by the sleeping waters, on the edge of which
station, at the top of their long legs, phenicoptera with
pink wings, watching for the passage of a fish or a frog. A
park alley with a foreground of architecture, a perron with columns
and with balusters, by which descend ladies and lords
that wait for horses of hand held by servants;--to recall
the denomination of the coffee, Mr. Lagier represented a Turk making the kief
after smoking opium or hashish, and seeing dancing in the vapor
blue a crowd of houris infinitely more attractive than those of the
_Paradise of Mahomet_ by M. Schopin. There is also a kind of
_Conversation Orientale_, by M. Reynaud, in dazzling costumes and
whimsical, which takes place in front of a half-draped white wall
with a mantle of greenery and flowers of a superb tone, and seascapes
of an artist whose name unfortunately escapes me, but who are
very remarkable and could support themselves next to Isabey, Durand
Brager, Gudin and Melby. The name that escaped me writing the line
previous one comes back to me now, by one of those oddities of memory
that cannot be explained; it's Landais that this skillful is called
painter. Let us not forget two landscapes by M. Maggy, solid in design and
robust in tone, intermingled with animals that Palizzi would not disavow.
It would be desirable that this Marseilles gallery, lost in a café,
was lithographed and published. This example of smart decoration
should be well followed in Paris, where one abuses a little too much stupid luxury
mirrors, gilding and fabrics.

You have no doubt read the witty jokes of Méry on
the deterioration of Marseilles and the sadness of the fountains, which, by dint of
of architecture, tried to make people forget that they lacked water.
The work to divert the Durance has been completed, and each
Bastide is proud today of a basin and a water jet. It
is who push self-conceit to the waterfall. Marseilles will be
soon surrounded by a crowd of Versailles, Marly and Saint-Cloud
in miniature; before long, I'm afraid, these magnificent grounds
charred with light, these beautiful rocks the color of cork and bread
grilled will be covered with vegetation, and green-spinach, the joy of
owners, terror of landscape designers, will make this
sparkling aridity.

The anchor is lifted; the wheels hit the water; here we are out of the port;
we follow steep, emaciated, crumbled coasts, similar to those
on the other side of the Mediterranean. I don't know if we noticed it,
Marseille and its surroundings are much more southern than their
latitude doesn't seem to have it. You have African aspects there
with a harshness as hot as in Algeria, and the physiognomy of the South
draws in a very violent way. Countries situated two or three
hundred leagues further south often look more northerly: these
ravined rocks, whose base plunges into a sea of ​​the darkest blue,
sometimes open and reveal a distant city,
surrounded by its bastides which dot the countryside with their thousand points
whites.

One meets here and there a few ships with swollen sails,
heading for the harbor where they hope to arrive before dark; Then
solitude sets in, the coasts disappear in the distance, the swell
sea ​​is felt; we can only see the sky and the water. Some
light sheep flake on the blue pasture of the sea. A poet
ancient would have seen the herds of Proteus there. The sun, which does not accompany
no cloud, plunges to the west like a red ball and seems to smoke
when entering the water. The night is coming, moonless night; a salty dew
falls on the deck and penetrates the clothes with its acrid humidity; THE
cigars slowly fall to ashes, sucked in by lips where nausea
would be decided at the first pitching stroke a little strong. The passengers
go down one by one and accommodate themselves as best they can in the drawers
which serve as a bed. To be rocked by the wave more regularly than
never was a child by his nurse, one does not sleep better, and one
has extravagant dreams interspersed with the bell that _stings_
the hour and mark the quarter to the sailors.

From dawn we are on our feet; nothing but this circle of two or three
leagues of which the ship is the center, and which moves with it, and
which we have agreed to call the immensity of the sea and the image of
infinity, I don't really know why, because the horizon that we discover from above
of the smallest tower or the most ordinary mountain is a hundred times
wider.

It is quite daylight, and on the left the captain signals a
land, which is Corsica. I see, even with a spyglass, only one
light mist barely discernible from the pale tints of the morning sky. THE
captain was right. The boat is running: the greyish vapor
condenses, hardens; mountain ripples are emerging,
a few dots light up, yellow keys mark the
bare escarpments, black patches, forests and places
covered with vegetation. Over there to the north, towards this point, must be
Isola-Rossa; further on, this chalky whiteness which merges with
the land is Ajaccio. But we pass too far, which
upset a lot, to discern any detail. We meet all
the day from a distance this energetic and wild Corsica, with
fierce poetically, with eternal vendettes, that progress will make
soon similar to the suburbs of Paris, Pantin or Batignolles.--This
would perhaps be the place here to place a brilliant piece on Napoleon;
but I prefer to avoid this easy commonplace, and I will limit myself to
remark in passing what influence the islands had on the destiny
of this almost fabulous hero already, and of which we see forming the
legend before our eyes: an island gives birth to it; fallen, he leaves
from an island and dies in an island, killed by an island; it comes out of the sea and
dives back into it. What myth will the future build on this, when
the fugitive story will have disappeared to give way to the eternal poem?
But we see the seven monks, pitfalls formed of rocks, having in
effect the appearance of hooded capuchins lined up in a row; we
approaching the narrow passage that separates Corsica from Sardinia on the side
of Bonifacio.

    Greece that we know too well, Sardinia that we ignore.

An extremely narrow channel divides the two islands, which obviously have no
had to do only one before the torrential cataclysms and the uprisings
volcanic; we see very distinctly the shore of each country: these are
rather steep mountainous hills, but without much character;
a few rare houses with yellow walls and tiled roofs dot the
the shore, which otherwise would seem like that of a desert island, because there
discovers no trace of culture; two or three boats under sail
flutter like seagulls from side to side.

On the side of Sardinia, we are pointed out, which is the
main curiosity of the place, a bizarre aggregation of rocks on
the summit of a hill, which draw very exactly, by their angles
and their sinuosities, the shape of a gigantic polar bear of the seas
fleeces; we distinguish, without putting the slightest complacency, as
that often happens for these kinds of prodigies, the spine, the legs,
the elongated head of the animal: the port, the pace, the color, everything is there.
As we approach, the profiles are lost, the forms are
confuse or present themselves in an unfavorable bearing. the bear
becomes rock again. The passage is crossed. We will follow in all its
length the coast of Sardinia facing Italy, as in the
day we went along the coast of Corsica which looks towards France.
Unfortunately night is coming, and we will be deprived of this spectacle; there
Sardinia will pass by us like a dream in the shadows. I do not know
nothing in the world more annoying than crossing at night a site that you
wanted to see for a long time. These misadventures happen frequently,
now that the traveler is only the accessory of the trip, and that
man is subject like an inert object to the means of transport.

When you wake up, the desert sea is a hard blue making the sky appear
pale. A few porpoises play in the ship's wake, swimming with
a swiftness that outstrips steam and seems to defy it; they
pursue, jump over each other and pass through
the foam of the bow, then they stay behind and disappear after
some antics.--To the left of the vessel, at some distance,
shows a huge leaden-colored fish, armed with a fin
dorsal fin blackish and pointed like a sting. It dives and does not reappear
more: these are there, with the distant appearance of three or four veils
continuing their route in various directions, the only events of the
daytime. The weather is quite cool; the jib sails are hoisted and the
foresail, which speed up our progress by a few knots. In the evening we
points out Cape Maritimo, at one of the points of this island that the
ancients named Trinacria, after its shape, and which is called
now Sicily. We'll still pass in darkness along
this ancient and picturesque shore, but tomorrow we will be in Malta from
day.

Around two o'clock, under a band of zebra clouds, I discern a
a slightly more opaque streak is the island of Goze. Soon the silhouette
cut more clearly. Huge sheer cliffs, at the foot of which the
sea ​​boils tumultuously, rise from the bosom of the waters, like the
top of a mountain drowned at its base; it is said that these large rocks
whites can stare at each other several hundred feet below
the transparency of the azure in which they are bathed, which produces an effect
frightening enough for those who shave them in a frail boat,
giving in a way the lowest level of the abyss. Along these
escarpments erected like fortress walls, fishermen
hanging from a rope, like the Italians who paint the
houses, cast lines and catch fish. The breaking of a
rope, a badly made knot, would throw them broken to the bottom of the
chasm.--We advance; slightly less steep waves
allow some cultivation: small stone walls, which from afar
look like lines drawn in ink on a topographic map,
enclose and separate the fields; the clouds have disappeared, a beautiful
a warm, golden color covers the grounds with a golden mantle. A lot
white bread from Spain, on which a few domes are rounded,
powders under a blinding sun at the top of a hill or rather a
mountain. This is Goze, the capital of the island. The curiosities of Goze are
caves dug on the edge of the sea, at the entrance of which
swirl clouds of aquatic birds which make their nest there; A
pit where grows a particular species of fungus highly esteemed,
of which the Knights of Malta had reserved the monopoly, and the saltworks
of the Watchmaker, bizarre hydraulic phenomenon, of which here is the brief
explanation. A Maltese watchmaker, having had the idea of ​​practicing
salt flats on the side of Zebug, where he owned land near the shore, made
dig the rock to evaporate the salt water; but the sea, having
mined below, rushed through this pit like a waterspout or like a
those water volcanoes of Iceland, at a height of over sixty feet,
and almost drowned the whole country. The opening was closed with great difficulty, and
from time to time the marine volcano makes attempts at eruption.--I have not
not seen the watchmaker's saltworks. I'm just telling what I've been told.

Goze and Malta are located exactly like Corsica and Sardinia;
a narrow pass separates them, and in primitive times they do not
were also to form a single island. The aspect of the coasts of Malta is
similar to that of the coasts of the island of Goze: it is the continuation
evidence of the same rocks, the same terrains, and the stratifications
geological ones continue from one island to another.

The climate has changed a great deal since the day before; the sky takes on tones
from overseas. The burning breath of neighboring Africa is felt.
Malta produces oranges; the Indian fig tree and the aloes prosper there;
we begin to see the fortifications of the city Valette, which
point out two windmills in the form of towers with eight wings making
the wheel, a bizarre arrangement common to the whole Orient, and which
deserves that Hoguet, the Raphaël of windmills, makes the trip
on purpose, both the wings, multiplied like the spokes of a wheel without
rims, have an original physiognomy. Water from blue turns green by
approach to land; we double the point Dragut. The steamer
makes a U-turn and enters the narrows of the port, passing through the
Saint-Elme Castle and Fort Ricazoli.

The fortifications, with their precise angles and sharp edges,
illuminated with a splendid light, take shape almost geometrically
between the dark blue of the sky and the raw green of the sea.
details of the shore stand out clearly: on the left rises a pyramid with
the memory of Colonel Cavendish and the points of the city stand out
Victorieuse and the town of La Sangle; on the right, stages in an amphitheater
the city of Valletta; the port, which bears the local name of Marse, sinks
inland by an indentation bifurcated at its end like the
bottom of the Red Sea; English, Sardinian, Neapolitan, Greek ships,
of all nations, are at anchor at different distances from shore,
according to their draft. On the quay, on the side of the city Valette, one
distinguishes English soldiers with the red coat and the white trousers of
rigor, and a few drays with large scarlet wheels, reminiscent of the
ancient corricolis of Naples; all this standing out against the walls
of dazzling whiteness. Without the positions being the same, there
a in this luxury of fortifications, in this British type mixed with the type
southern, something reminiscent of Gibraltar; this idea is
presents naturally to anyone who has seen these two possessions
English, keys that open or close the Mediterranean.

We were seen from the shore. A flotilla of canoes heads for all
oars to the steamer; we are surrounded, surrounded, invaded, one
peaceful boarding takes place; the bridge is covered in a minute with a crowd
of varied scoundrels squealing, shouting, screaming, jargon all
kinds of languages ​​and dialects; it feels like Babel on the day of the
dispersal of workers. Before knowing which nation you
belong, these funny polyglots try on you English,
Italian, French, Greek, even Turkish, until they have
come across an idiom in which you can tell them
intelligibly: “You knock me out! go to all the devils!”
The servants of the place, the waiters, pursue you, you
harass you, murder you with offers of service. We give you
cards in your hands, in your waistcoat, in the pocket of your
pants, in the pocket of your overcoat, in the cap of your
hat; the boatmen pull you to the right and to the left, by the
arm, by the collar of the coat, by the tail of the frock coat, at the risk
to tear you apart, a detail they care little about; they quarrel and
are fighting through you, vociferating, gesticulating, stamping,
struggling like possessed; but, in short, both killed and wounded, he
there is no one dead, and this scene of tumult can be called, as
Shakespeare's play, "Much Ado About Nothing." Noise
calms down, the travelers are distributed in several batches, and each
boatman seizes his prey. To boatmen and local servants
join the cigar merchants, who offer you packages
enormous at fabulously minimal prices: it is true that they are
execrable.

I noticed among this motley crowd of people who were quite
features. Brunette heads with lustrous black hair rolled in
short spirals, with thick mouths, sparkling eyes, of a type
almost African on a background of Greek regularity, presented themselves
frequently, and seemed to me to belong properly to the Maltese race. These
heads implanted on wiry necks and strong busts do not have
been reproduced by painting, and would provide new models.
As for the costume, it is very simple: tight canvas pants
at the hips by a woolen belt, a puffy shirt, a bonnet
red bent over the ear, neither stockings nor shoes.

While the passengers, in a hurry to get ashore, encumbered
the ladder, I watched the rowboats crowding the side of the ship like
small fish around a whale, and I noted the peculiarities
construction and ornament. Intended for port service, where the water
is usually quiet, these boats have no rudder, the
bow and stern are marked by a raised frame having
resemblance to the beak of a gondola in Venice which one would not have
still adapted this serrated iron key which simulates a violin neck;
at the bow open two crudely painted eyes, like on the rowboats
from Cadiz and Puerto; beside these eyes, a hand, extending the finger
indicator, seems to designate the road. Is it a symbol of vigilance, a
condom against the _jettatura_ and the evil eye? That's what I do
can tell you precisely; but these eyes thus placed give to these
boats a vague aspect of a fish swimming at the surface of the rather strange water.
On the bow back are painted the arms of England, with the
lion and the unicorn, their heraldic supports in raw colors and
violent, or else a ferocious hussar makes an impossible horse rear up due
at the whim of some painter-glazier. more boats
modest ones are satisfied with a simple pot of widely blooming flowers.

The crowd decreases; I enter a canoe, I go ashore, I pass
under a fairly dark door. A stepped street presents itself to me: I
climbs at random, according to my habit of walking without a guide in the
unknown cities; according to certain topographical instincts which
rarely go wrong, and, after a few zigzags, I come out on the square
of the Government, just at the hour when the English retreat was about to sound.
This retreat deserves a special description: the drums, the
bass drum, the fife, lined up silently at one end of the
place; I have no desire to cast ridicule on the English army,
but I am not yet sure that this music was not borrowed from
some organ of Cremona: at a sign from the master, the drums raised
their drumsticks, the bass drum its buffer, the fife its jig, but
with a movement so sharp, so mechanical, so regularly the same, that it
seemed produced by springs and not by muscles. eight legs of
white pants rose and fell in a geometric step, and
a savage hurricane of disagreements was unleashed.

The bass drum growled like an angry bear, the drums
sounded the cracked, and the fife, soared to impossible heights,
beat extravagant trills; but the musicians, despite all this
fury, nevertheless retained motionless, inert, icy faces,
on which the breeze from the south had not been able to melt the frost from the north.
Arrived at the other end of the square, they turned abruptly
and went back the same way emitting the same charivari.--You have
probably seen those toys from Germany with a crank that
annoys a brass wire with a feather pipe and brings out of a
heals a Prussian soldier to the sound of shrill little music; the soldier
advances through a slide to the end of the box, turns around and
returns to its starting point. Grow and multiply this toy
from Germany, and you will have the most exact idea of ​​retirement
English. I would never have believed that man could succeed in aping if
perfectly painted wood. It's a great triumph for the discipline.

Going back down to the sea, I see a reflection of candles blazing in
through the door of a church. I enter. Red damask draperies
laced with gold envelop the pillars. On the altar all plated with silver
sparkle suns of filigree and rhinestones. some lamps
spread a mysterious half-light in the side chapels. Before
a grilled Madonna are hung from _ex voto_ in wax and silver; of the
fierce paintings, in the manner of Espagnolet or Caravaggio,
dimly discern by candlelight; I seem to be in a
Church of Spain, in full convinced and fervent Catholicism.

Little boys, squatting in rows on wooden benches, chanting
gutturally a canticle of which an old priest gives them the tone.
derives more edification from the intention than from the music. Night has fallen
absolutely. Lanterns shine at the corners of the streets in front of the images
Madonnas and saints. Edible merchant shops and
of refreshments are illuminated by shimmering nightlights
among the greenery displays like glowworms under the grass. Of the
hooded women of the _faldette_ go up and down the
street stairs, mysteriously skimming the walls, bats
from the twilight of love.--I believe, God forgive me, that I come
to hear the copper plates of a tambourine quivering; a
practiced hand taps on the belly of a guitar while touching the strings
thumb.--Am I in Malta (English possession), or in Granada, in
the Antequerula? It's been a long time since I've heard the scraping
ham in the middle of the street, and I began to believe, despite the memories of
my three trips to Spain, that the thing only took place in the
Romance vignettes. It made my heart a few years younger, and
I get back into my boat to return to the _Leonidas_, humming the
less false than it is possible for me the motive that I have just heard.
Tomorrow I will return to see, in the pure light of day, what I have
unraveled in the shade of the evening, and I will try to give you an idea of
the city of Valletta, the seat of the Order of Malta, which played such a role
brilliant in history, and which died out, like all
institutions that no longer have a goal, however glorious their
pass.




II

MALTA


I found, in Malta, this beautiful light of Spain whose Italy
even, with its vaunted sky, offers only a pale reflection. He does
truly clear, and this is not one of those twilights more or less
less pale that we decorate with the name of day in the climates
northern. The canoe drops me on the quay, and I enter the city
Valletta by the Lascaris gate, Lascaris-gate, as the inscription says
written above the arch. This Greek name and this English word, welded together by
a hyphen, have a bizarre effect. The whole destiny of Malta is
in these two words; under the vault, in the passage as well as at the door of the
Judgment in Granada, there is a chapel to the Virgin, grilled, at the bottom of
which flickers a nightlight, and whose threshold is obstructed with
beggars, who, for the beauty of the rag, would not be moved
among beggars of the Albayzin; hot countries gild the rags and
scorch them as desired for the palette of painters. through this door,
comes and goes a motley and cosmopolitan crowd; Tunisians,
Arabs, Greeks, Turks, Smyrniots, Levantines of all
the scales in their national costume, not counting the Maltese, the
English and Europeans from different countries.

I remember a tall negro wrapped, for all clothing, in a
woolen blanket on which he draped himself majestically, elbowing a
young English woman in such a correct and strictly
British as if she had trod the green grass of Hyde-Park or the
Piccadilly sidewalk; he looked so quiet, so sure of himself
in his lousy rag, that he certainly wouldn't have wanted to change it
against the brand new coat of a dandy on the boulevard de Gand. Orientals,
even of the lower classes, have a surprising natural dignity; he
there passed Turks whose whole dress was not worth an asper and
that one would have taken for princes in disguise. This aristocracy comes to them
of their religion, which makes them regard other men as
dogs: drays painted red sliced ​​through the crowd, crossing with
strange cars whose wheels are thrown very far from the
body all carried forward, and somewhat reminiscent, for the
arrangement of the train, the crews of Louis XIV in the landscapes of
Van der Meulen. I believe this particular kind of car in Malta, because I
haven't seen it anywhere else. Their circulation is, moreover, restricted to
some main streets, the others being carved into stairs or
steep ramps.

Inside the Porte de Lascaris is a very lively market,
very lively, under tents and barracks with strings of onions,
bags of chickpeas, heaps of tomatoes and cucumbers, packets of
peppers, baskets of red fruits, and all kinds of edibles
full of local color, picturesquely spread out. A beautiful fountain
marble basin surmounted by a large bronze Neptune, leaning on
a trident in a cavalier pose, and rococo, produces a charming effect
in the middle of these shops.--Among the cafes, the cabarets, the
eateries, one comes across an English tavern here and there, boarded up with its
sign of single and double porter, old scotish-ale, east india
pale beer, gin, whiskey, brandwine and other mixtures
vitriolic for the use of the subjects of Great Britain, which contrasts
oddly with lemonades, cherry syrups and drinks
ice cream vendors of sorbets in the open air. The policemen, armed with a
short staff with the arms of England, like those of London, run through
with a steady step this southern crowd, and cause order to reign there. Nothing
no longer wise, no doubt; but these serious, cold, decent men
in all the force of the word, impassive representatives of the law, make a
singular effect between this luminous sky and this burning earth. Their
profile seems made expressly to stand out against the mists
of High-Holborn and Temple-Bar.

The city of Valette, founded in 1566 by the grand master whose name it bears
name, is the capital of Malta; the city of La Sangle, the city
Victorious, who occupy two points of land on the other side of the port
de la Marse, with the Floriana and Burmola suburbs, complete the
city, surrounded by bastions, ramparts, counterscarps, forts and
of forts to make any siege impossible. With every step we take, we
finds himself face to face with a cannon when following one of the streets which
circumscribe the city, such as Strada-Levante or Strada-Ponente.
Gibraltar itself is no more bristling with guns.
The disadvantage of these multiplied works is that they embrace a
very large radius and that it would be necessary, to defend them in case of attack,
a large garrison, always difficult to maintain and renew
far from the motherland.

From the top of these ramparts you can see, as far as the eye can see, the blue sea and
transparent, embossed with moires by the breeze and pricked with veils
white. Red sentries stand guard from a distance
distance; the heat of the sun is so strong on these glazes, that a canvas,
stretched by a frame and turning on a stake, shades the
soldiers, who, without this precaution, would roast on the spot.

Going up to the second door, we find a Jesuit-style church
and rococo, in the style of the churches of Madrid, which offers nothing
curious inside. This door, where one arrives by a drawbridge,
is surmounted by the triumphal coat of arms of England, and its moat, transformed
in the garden, is obstructed by a luxuriant southern vegetation of a green
metallic and varnished: silt, orange trees, fig trees, myrtles, cypresses,
planted pell-mell in a bushy and charming disorder. Above
the enclosure, exceeding the terraces of the houses, opens onto the blue
from the sky a series of white arcades framing the promenade of the piazza
Regina, located at the top of the city, and from where one enjoys a view
Magnificent.

The city of Valletta, though built on a regular plan and so to speak
all of a block, is no less picturesque. The extreme gradient of
terrain compensates for what the exact layout of the streets might have
monotonous, and the city climbs the hill by steps and degrees,
which it covers in an amphitheater. The houses, very tall, like those
of Cadiz, to enjoy the view of the sea, end in terraces of
pozzolan. They are all in white Maltese stone, a sort of
tufa very easy to cut, and with which one can, without great expense,
give in to the whims of sculpture and ornamentation. These houses
rectilinear bear admirably and have an air of grandeur and strength
that they owe to the absence of roofs, cornices and attics. They
stand out sharply at right angles to the azure of the sky, that their whiteness
makes it seem more intense; but what gives them a character
original are the projecting balconies, applied to their facades
like Arabic moucharabies or Spanish watchtowers. These cages
glazed, adorned with flowers and shrubs, and which look like
greenhouses projected out of the house, bear on brackets and
modillions in volutes, in denticulated battlements, in twisted foliage, in
ornamental chimeras of the most varied fantasy.

The balconies happily break the lines of the facades, and, seen from the end
of the street, present the happiest profiles; the shadows they
cut out by their strong protrusions stand out appropriately on the light tone
facades. The twigs of Algiers peas, the red stars of
geranium, the porcelain flowers of succulents, overflowing with
their open windows brighten up the blue and the
white, your room of the board. It is in these watchtowers that the women of
Malta's upper class spend their lives, watching for the slightest breath
of the sea breeze, or sagging under the enervating influences of the
sirocco. We can see their white arms leaning on their elbows from the street, and we see
shine the corner of their black pupil, which distracts you
pleasantly from your architectural contemplations.--The Maltese,
rare thing among women who allow themselves to be directed in their toilet
rather by fashion than by taste, had the good sense to keep
their national costume, at least in the street. This garment, called
_faldetta_, consists of a kind of petticoat of a particular cut and
which we hood by widening or narrowing the opening,
maintained by a small whale rod, depending on whether you want more
or less let his face be seen.

The faldetta is uniformly black like a domino, of which it has all the
advantages, plus a grace denied to the shapeless satin bags that
chirp in carnival in the foyer of the Opera; we hide a cheek and an eye
on the side of the person of whom one does not want to be seen, one rejects the
faldetta back or it goes up to the nose, depending on the
circumstances. It is the masked ball transported in the middle of the street. Under this
hood of black taffeta, quite similar to the Thereses of our
grandmothers, we usually wear a pink or lilac dress with large
ruffles. As far as I could judge when an auspicious breath made
flutter the mysterious veil, the Maltese get closer to the type
oriental by their large Arabian eyes, their pale complexion and their
usually aquiline. As I did not see a complete face, but the
pupil of this one, the nose of that one, the cheek of another, and not
a single chin (except at the windows, as a ceiling shortcut), because the
faldetta covers them, I do not make a final judgment, and I
give my observation for what it is worth.

The Traveller's Guides and special works of geography claim
that the Maltese have a flirtatious mood and a weak heart. I am not
not a Don Juan transcendent enough to have assured myself of
the truth of this assertion in a stay of a few hours; but the
houses have two or three floors of watchtowers, the women carry
uniformly over the head a petticoat which is the equivalent of the old
Venetian mask and the current Spanish mantilla, the sirocco blows
three days out of four it is usually twenty-eight degrees
heat, we play the guitar in the streets, in the evening, and the offices
are closely followed. Besides, it is very difficult to be puritanically
icy between Sicily and Africa. This facility of morals is
attributed, always by the same serious books, to the corruption of
Knights of Malta; but the poor knights have been sleeping for many
years under their mosaic tombs, in the Church of St. John, and the
fault, if fault there is, is entirely in the sun. all i can
to say is that they seemed to me very pungent thus bundled up and putting
nose to the window through the opening of this skirt.

While running at random, I come across charming street corners that
would make a watercolourist happy. The balconies wrap around the corner
and form several floors of turrets or galleries, depending on their
dimension. A life-size Madonna or Saint, her head under a
stone canopy, feet on an enormous scrolled sheath plinth
corkscrews, present themselves unexpectedly to the adoration of people
pious and pencil sketchers; large lanterns,
supported by brackets of complicated locksmithing, illuminate these
devout images and provide lovely drawing patterns. I do not
did not expect to find crossroads so catholic in Malta
English. At the bottom of most of these statues are written, on
rounded cartridges, inscriptions like this: "Mgr
Fernando Mattei, Bishop of Malta, or His Most Reverend Excellency Don
F. Saverio, grant forty days of indulgence to all those who say
a _Pater_, an _Ave_ and a _Gloria_ before the images of the Most Holy
Virgin or Saint Francis Borgia, placed there by them.” Since
I spoke of sacred sculpture, I will place here a rather bizarre detail
that I noticed on the doorway of a church.

They are skulls tied with butterfly wings. This
hieroglyph, funereal pompadour, of the brevity of life seemed to me
associate in a new way the emblems of the boudoir with the ornaments of the
fall. One could not be more gallantly sepulchral, ​​and the idea must have been
caressed by a pretty little court abbot. If the meaning of this funereal rebus
was clear to me, it was not the same with a small bas-relief
which I have seen above the door of several houses, and which
represents, with slight variations, a naked woman immersed in the
flames to the waist, and raising his arms to the sky. A banner
bears this engraved word: _Valletta_. A Maltese, whom I consult, explains to me
that the rent of the houses thus designated goes to the brotherhood of souls
of Purgatory after the death of their owners, for whom it is said
prayers and masses. This naked woman symbolizes the soul.

The palace of the grand masters, now the government palace, has
nothing remarkable as architecture. Its date is recent, and it
does not correspond to the idea that one has of the residence of Villiers de
Ile-Adam, the Lavalettes and their successors. However he has a
rather monumental presence and produces a beautiful effect on this large
square, of which it occupies one of the sides. Two rustic column doors
break the uniformity of this long facade; a huge watchtower,
forming an interior gallery, and carried by strong sculpted consoles,
circulates at approximately the height of the first floor, and gives the building
the stamp of Malta. This very local detail highlights what this
architecture could have flat. This palace, vulgar in its
magnificence, thus becomes original.--The interior, which I visited,
offers a series of vast rooms and galleries containing paintings
depicting land and sea battles, sieges, boardings
Turkish galleys and galleys of Religion (this is how one
collectively called the Order of St. John), by Matteo da Lecce.--There
also has paintings from the Trevisan, the Spanish, and the Guide, the
Calabrese and Michelangelo by Caravaggio.

The cicerone makes you walk through large apartments with wooden floors
covered with fine mats, with columns of stucco or marble, with
high-warp tapestries after Martin de Voos or Jouvenet, with
lozenge or grid wooden ceilings, accommodated, with more or less
of taste, to the current destination: the coats of arms and portraits of
great masters recall here and there the former inhabitants of this palace
knightly, now an English residence; I was surprised to find there
a portrait of Lawrence, a George III or IV, all in white satin and
scarlet, facing a rather well painted Louis XVI, although less
shimmering with pearly reflections than the English monarch. One of the biggest
halls, when I passed through Malta, was laid out as a ballroom, and at
one of the columns hung the printed map of waltzes, polkas and
quadrilles; this detail, although quite natural, made us smile; he
would brighten the shadows of young knights if they please to return
at night in their old home: the surly old people get away
would offend alone, for these soldier monks led quite a merry life,
and their _inns_ looked more like barracks than
monasteries. The throne of England, with its canopy, coat of arms and
lambrequins, rises proudly in place of the armchair occupied by
the grand master of the order, and the portraits in colored lithograph of
the numerous offspring of Prince Albert and Queen Victoria, as well as
as it must be with every loyal subject, hang on the walls
astonished by this asylum of celibacy.

I would have liked to visit the armor museum, touch these striped helmets
by the blades of Damascus, these breastplates dented by the stone of the
catapults, and under which beat so many noble hearts: these
shields emblazoned with the cross of the order, and where
trembling the Saracen arrows; but, after an hour of waiting and
research, I am told that the guard had gone to the countryside and had
took the keys with him. At this superb response, I still believed myself
in Spain, where, seated in front of the door of some monument,
I waited until the concierge had finished his siesta and wanted to let me in.
It was therefore necessary to give up seeing these heroic scrap metals and direct my
race elsewhere.

To finish with the knights, I headed for the church
Saint-Jean, which is like the Pantheon of the order. The facade, with pediment
triangular, flanked by two towers terminated by pinnacles of
stone, having no other ornament than four coupled pillars and
superimposed, and pierced with a window and a door without sculpture and
without arabesque, does not prepare the traveler for the magnificence of the interior.
The first thing that arrests the view is a huge vault painted in
fresco which takes all the length of the nave; this fresco,
unfortunately deteriorated by time, or rather by the bad
quality of the coating, is from Mattias Preti, known as the Calabrese, one of those
secondary grand masters who, if they have less genius, have
sometimes more talented than the princes of art. What is there
science, skill, wit, abundance and resources in this
colossal painting, of which we hardly speak, is truly unimaginable.

Each division of the vault contains a subject from the life of Saint John,
who the church is dedicated to, and who was the patron of the order. These
divisions are supported, in their fallout, by groups of captives,
Saracens, Turks, Christians or others, half-naked or covered with some
remains of broken armor, in humiliated and constrained poses, species
of barbaric caryatids well suited to the subject. All this part of
the fresco is full of character and stew, and shines with a force
rare color in this kind of painting. These solid tones argue
the light tones of the vault, and cause the _skies_ to flee to a great
depth. I know of no machine as big as the ceiling of
Fumiani, in the Church of Saint Pantaleon, in Venice, representing the
life, martyrdom and apotheosis of the saint of that name. But the taste of
decadence is less felt in the work of the Calabrian than in that
of the Venetian. If one wants to know the pupil of Guercino thoroughly, it is to
Malta, at St. John's Church, that you must come. As a reward for this
gigantic work, Mattias Preti had the honor of being received knight of
order, like Caravaggio.

The pavement of the church consists of four hundred tombs of knights,
encrusted with jasper, porphyry, ancient green, breccias of all
colors, which must form the most splendid funeral mosaic; I say
must, because, at the time of my visit, they were covered by these
immense esparto mats with which the southern churches are lined;
use which is explained by the absence of chairs and the habit of
kneel on the ground to perform their devotions. I regretted it
briskly; but the chapels and the crypt contain enough wealth
sepulchrals to compensate you. These chapels, extremely ornate
arabesque, volutes, foliage and foliage of sculpture
interspersed with crosses, coats of arms, fleur-de-lis, all gilded in gold of
ducat, surprise with their wealth those who know only the
churches of France, of such severe nudity and such melancholy
romantic. This profusion of ornaments, these gildings, these marbles
varied, seem to the French to be more suited to the decoration of a
palace or a ballroom, because our Catholicism is a bit
Protestant.

The tomb of Nicolas Cotoner, one of the great masters who have the most
contributed to the splendor of the order, and who spent their fortune
special in providing Malta with useful or luxurious monuments, is not
of a very good taste, but it is rich and composed of precious materials.
It consists of a pyramid applied to the wall, surmounted by a ball
crossing accompanied by a Fame sounding the trumpet and a
little genius holding the coat of arms of the Cotoner. The bust of the Grandmaster
occupies the bottom of the pyramid in the center of a trophy of helmets,
cannons, mortars, flags, shields, boarding axes and
of spades. Two kneeling slaves, their arms tied behind their backs, and
one of which turns around with an air of revolt, supports the plinth and
form the pedestal. I have described this tomb in detail, for it is like
the type of others, where the emblems of faith mingle with the symbols of
war, as befits an order both military and
religious. You should also take a look at the mausoleum of the great
Master Rohan, very magnificent and very coquettish, and on that of Don Ramon
of Perillas, grand Spanish master, whose talking arms are
interspersed with crosses and pears.

I looked at all these graves with no other impression than sadness
respect that always gives to a living and thinking being the stone
behind which is hidden a being who lived and thought like him. But
what was my emotion when I met at the bend of an arcade a
marble signed Pradier, with these half-Greek, half-French characters, and
this heterogeneous _sigma_ to which he desperately wanted to give the value
of an _epsilon_! The last lines I had written in France, two
hours before my departure, lamented the sudden death of this beloved artist,
who could still do so many masterpieces. I found
unexpectedly in Malta one of his most gracefully statues
melancholy, where he knew how to preserve in death all the charm of
youth, that of the unfortunate Count of Beaujolais, whom we have so
admired at the Salon ten years ago. The recently dead was me
recalled by an already ancient tomb, if the tombs have an age and if the
pyramid of Cheops is older than the closed pit of yesterday in
Father Lachaise. Blessed, however, is he who bequeaths his name to the hardest
material that is, and ensures by beautiful works the immortality
relative that man can dispose of!

An underground chapel, rather neglected, contains the graves of
Villiers de l'Ile-Adam, de la Valette and other great recumbent masters
in their armor on emblazoned cippi, supported by lions,
birds and chimeras; some in bronze, others in marble or
some other precious material. This crypt is not mysterious
nor funeral. The light of hot countries is too bright to lend itself
to the chiaroscuro effects of Gothic cathedrals.

Before leaving the church, let us not forget to mention a group of
_Saint John baptizing Christ_, by the Maltese sculptor Gaffan, placed on
the high altar, full of talent, if a little mannered, and a painting
of superb ferocity, by Michelangelo de Carravaggio, having as its subject the
detachment of the same saint. Through the dust of abandonment and the
smoke of time, we unravel pieces of surprising realism,
earthy curves and an extraordinarily energetic make.

The hour is advancing, and the steamer is not waiting for latecomers.
Let's once again walk the rue de Saint-Jean and rue de Sainte-Ursule la
picturesque, with their stepped landings, projecting balconies,
shops that line them, the crowd that rises and falls perpetually
their stairs, the Strada-Stretta, which once had the privilege of
serve as a ground for the duelists of the order, without being able to
worry; let's take a look, from the top of the ramparts, at this
wild countryside, divided by stone walls, without shade and without
vegetation, devoured by a harsh sun; look at the sea from the top of the
Piazza Regina, dotted with English tombs; canoe across the
Marse, let's walk along the main street of La Sangle, and get back on board with
the regret of not being able to take a pair of these pretty stone vases
of Malta, which the inhabitants sharpen with a knife in the most
ingenious and the most elegant.

It's half past four, and the ship weighs anchor at five.
hours.--An entirely local amusement is reserved for us as
bouquet of our too short stay in Malta. Small boats
surround laden with naked kids. The Maltese swim like the
ducks out of the egg, and are excellent divers.
top of the brim a piece of silver overboard; the water is so clear in the
port, that she could be seen going down to about twenty feet from
depth. The kids watched the fall of the currency, plunged
immediately after her and caught her three times out of four, exercise
no less favorable to their health than to their purse. You will excuse me for
not to tell you about the catacombs, the Bengemma hill, the remains of the
temple of Hercules, of the cave of Calypso, because scholars claim
that Malta is Homer's Ogygia: I had no time to see them, and
it is not worth copying what others have said about it.

Tomorrow, in the morning, we will see the shores of Greece. I do not
am not a frenzied classic, far from it, however this idea
trouble. One always experiences some apprehension at seeing the formulation
in reality a land glimpsed from childhood through the mist of
poetic dreams.




III

SYRA


Tomorrow, during the day, we will be in sight of Cape Matapan, a barbaric name
which hides the harmony of the old name, like a layer of lime paste
a fine sculpture. Cape Ténare is the extreme tip of this sheet
of mulberry tree with deep cutouts spread over the sea that we call
today the Morea and which was formerly called the Peloponnese. All the
passengers were standing on the deck, gazing at the horizon, in the
indicated direction, three or four hours before it was possible to do anything
distinguish. This magical name of Greece makes the imaginations work
more inert; the bourgeois most foreign to the ideas of art
move themselves and remember the dictionary of
Chompré.
waves:--it was Greece; a mountain stuck its hip out of the water, like
a nymph resting on the sand after bathing, beautiful, pure,
elegant, worthy of this sculptural land. “What is this mountain?
I asked the captain. "The Taygetos," he replied kindly,
as if he had said Montmartre. At this name of Taygete, a fragment of verse
des _Georgiques_ instantly springs from my memory:

    ... Virginibus bacchata Lacænis
    Taygeta!

and began to flutter on my lips like a monotonous refrain, but which
was enough for me. What can be said better about a Greek mountain
than a verse of Virgil?--Even though it was the middle of the month of June and
was quite hot, the top of the mountain was silvered with blades of
snow, and I thought of the rosy feet of those beautiful girls from Laconia
who traveled as bacchantes the Taygetos, and left their mark
lovely on white trails!

Cape Matapan juts out between two deep gulfs, which it divides from its
ridge: the Gulf of Coron and that of Kolokythia; it is a point of
barren and barren land, like all the coasts of Greece. When we have it
passed, you are shown, on the right, a block of fawn rocks,
cracked with dryness, charred with heat, without the appearance of
greenery or even topsoil: this is Cerigo, ancient Kythera,
the island of myrtles and roses, the beloved abode of Venus, whose name
summarizes the dreams of pleasure. What would Watteau have said with his boarding
for Kythera all blue and all pink, in front of this harsh shore of rock
crumbled, cutting its severe contours under a sun without shade and
able to offer a cave for the penance of the anchorites, but not a
bocage to the caresses of lovers: Gérard de Nerval at least had
the pleasure of seeing on the shore of Cythera a hanged man wrapped in canvas
waxed, which proves careful and comfortable justice. The _Leonidas_
passed too far from land for its passengers to be able to enjoy a
detail so graceful, even if all the gallows on the island had been
stocked at this time.